1. Introduction
Health communication researchers have been proactive in investigating a range of barriers to effective communication in healthcare. These barriers include poor educational attainment, challenging cultural factors, and low levels of trust in healthcare institutions (Rademakers et al., 2012, Kreuter and McClure, 2004, Armstrong et al., 2006). And yet, one of the greatest barriers to effective health communication – an inability to communicate as a result of developmental disorders, injury, or disease – has been all but completely overlooked in health communication research. This article argues that children and adults with so-called communication disorders require special consideration in healthcare settings and in health communication research.
The reasons for limited research into people with communication disorders by health communication researchers are twofold. First, the medical conditions that cause communication disorders require a wide range of knowledge in areas such as neurology, anatomy, and clinical linguistics. These fields of study and clinical practice often lie outside the expertise of health communication scholars. Second, there is a mistaken assumption that this population of children and adults has language proficiency issues, and that this area is addressed by research in other aspects of health communication (e.g., interpreter-mediated communication). This assumption is unhelpful in that it conflates a clinical impairment of language and communication with language use among healthy speakers of different languages.
This article begins with a definition of communication disorder. It then discusses the prevalence of these disorders in the general population and in healthcare settings. The impact of communication disorders on mental well-being and quality of life is also examined. Several communication disorders are highlighted using five key life stages: the early years; older childhood; adolescence; young adulthood; and old adulthood. Finally, the work of the professionals who assess and treat communication disorders – speech-language pathologists (SLPs) – is considered. By the end of the discussion, it is hoped that communication researchers and health professionals should have a comprehensive understanding of this complex population of clients in healthcare and a better understanding of why the needs of this population should be addressed in health communication research.
2. Characterizing communication disorders
A communication disorder is an impairment of any of the processes by means of which speakers produce, and hearers comprehend, spoken, written, or signed utterances. The impairment can have its onset before, during, or after birth, or at any time during the developmental period (a developmental communication disorder). (The developmental period can extend anywhere up to 22 years of age, according to the definition of the American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (2021).) Alternatively, the impairment that causes a communication disorder may arise for the first time in adulthood, or at least after the point at which language and communication skills are normally fully developed (an acquired communication disorder). The impairment may disrupt the processes that allow linguistic encoding and decoding to occur (a language disorder) or the processes that permit movements of the speech musculature to take place (a speech disorder). Also, there may be disruption in the flow of speech (a fluency disorder), the production of voice in the larynx (a voice disorder), or in the sensory processes that underpin hearing (a hearing disorder). Some communication disorders may resolve spontaneously (e.g., stuttering in young children), others may remain static (e.g., alaryngeal voice production in people with surgical removal of the larynx), while still others may deteriorate or worsen over time (e.g., language disorder in dementia). Each of these communication disorders can be mild, moderate, or severe in nature, with some disorders more effectively addressed through speech-language pathology than other disorders.
Communication in health settings has the same dyadic character of communication in general. A child or an adult with a communication disorder must take turns with a healthcare provider to assume the roles of hearer and speaker. In the role of the hearer, communication breakdown can take several forms. If a child or adult has hearing loss, he or she may not be able to process the speech signal that a healthcare provider produces, while an individual with visual impairment may lack important visual cues as to what a speaker is saying. Even if sensory processing of the speech signal takes place, there may be breakdown at the stage of language decoding in a child with developmental language disorder or in an adult with stroke-induced aphasia. A child with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or an adult with schizophrenia may succeed in decoding an utterance, only to fail in interpreting the speaker’s communicative intention in producing the utterance. This failure compromises a hearer’s ability to establish a speaker’s purpose in speaking, which linguists characterize as the pragmatic meaning of an utterance.
These receptive deficits on the part of the hearer in communication have corresponding expressive deficits on the part of the speaker. The child with ASD or the adult with schizophrenia may struggle to form a communicative intention that can be conveyed through a spoken, written, or signed utterance. Even if a communicative intention can take shape in the mind of the speaker with a communication disorder, it may still have a rather difficult journey on its way to production. The child or adult with language disorder may be unable to select the linguistic structures – sounds, grammatical constructions, and word meanings – that are needed to express the utterance. Even if linguistic encoding takes place successfully, the message may still fail to be conveyed to the hearer because nervous signals cannot reach speech muscles, instructing them to contract. In this case, the child or adult with a communication disorder may produce a grammatically well-formed utterance that is nevertheless unintelligible, because the oral, respiratory, and laryngeal muscles that are needed to produce voice and articulate speech sounds are contracting with abnormal force, timing, and range.
As the above discussion demonstrates, there are many ways in which communication with healthcare providers can be compromised in children and adults with communication disorders. This is in addition to the well-known barriers to effective communication between patients and healthcare providers (e.g., time constraints and limited patient knowledge). It is incumbent on providers to be aware of the communicative challenges of this complex population and to address disparities in care that these challenges can create. There is clear evidence, for example, that people with communication disorders experience significantly poorer health outcomes than adults without these disorders. In this way, Stransky et al. (2018) studied 33,166 adults, among whom 3346 (10.1%) had some form of communication disability. Adults with communication disability reported a higher prevalence of chronic health conditions (e.g., hypertension) than adults without communication disability. While only 25% of adults without communication disability reported ≥ 2 chronic conditions, this same number of chronic conditions was reported by 40% of people with voice disorder, 44% of adults with speech and language disorder, and 63% of adults with speech, language, and voice disorders. To address the disproportionately large health burdens experienced by people with communication disorders, healthcare providers must understand how communication disability contributes to poor health outcomes and must implement interventions that can mitigate the harmful effects of these disorders.
3. Prevalence of communication disorders
It is important to recognize that communication disorders have a high prevalence not only in the general population but also in children and adults in healthcare settings. It is for this reason that we should focus on these disorders in health communication research and strive to understand their impact on communication in healthcare. All health professionals encounter individuals with these disorders at some point in their careers; most health professionals encounter individuals with communication disorders on many occasions. The presence of people with these disorders on medical wards and in clinics of health professionals is not some hypothetical situation that may come about; rather, it is a present-day reality of healthcare systems around the world. Accepting this fact is the first step on the road to integrating clients with communication disorders into health communication research.
The prevalence of communication disorders in children and adults varies considerably across studies. In 2012, 7.7% of children aged 3–17 years in the United States had a communication or swallowing disorder (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 2015). This equates to nearly one in 12 children. The most common disorders were speech problems (5%), language problems (3.3%), voice difficulties (1.4%), and swallowing difficulties (0.9%). Among school-aged children in South India and Spain, communication disorders have prevalence rates of 4.29% (Ravi et al. 2021) and 1.05% (Bosch et al. 2021), respectively. In 2016, approximately 10% of the non-institutionalized adult population in the United States reported a speech, language and/or voice problem in the preceding 12 months (Morris et al. 2016). Prevalence varied with age, gender, and race/ethnicity. Communication disorders were more commonly reported by people aged 80 years and older than by people aged 25–64 years. A greater proportion of the female population reported voice problems than the male population, and Black adults were more likely to report language problems than White adults (Morris et al. 2016).
There has been limited research into the prevalence of communication disorders in healthcare settings. Studies that have been conducted report higher prevalence rates of communication disorders in these settings than in the general population. Moderate or severe difficulties in at least one aspect of speech and language have been reported in over two-thirds of people in a mental health unit (Emerson and Enderby, 1996). Among patients on an acute ward of a department of medicine for the elderly, 73% had speech and/or language problems and 36% had hearing problems (Sweeney et al. 1993). Unsurprisingly, a high prevalence of communication impairment is reported for patients in critical care facilities. Freeman-Sanderson et al. (2019), for example, found that approximately one-third of patients in an intensive care unit of a tertiary Australian hospital had difficulty in communicating.
It is important to acknowledge that many communication disorders remain undiagnosed. Cohen et al. (1998) identified previously unsuspected language impairment in 40% of 380 children aged 7–14 years who were referred to child psychiatric services. Of the 34,525 adults surveyed by Morris et al. (2016), only 17% of adults who reported a voice problem received a diagnosis. A similarly low rate of diagnosis was also found for language and speech problems, with only 23% of those reporting a language problem and 23% of those reporting a speech problem receiving a diagnosis. Only two (2.4%) of 82 relatively healthy adults with HIV/AIDS showed normal findings when assessed using a total of 24 communication assessments (Kallail et al. 2014). The high prevalence (97.6%) of communication problems in this group of adults illustrates once again that many people with communication disorders do not receive a diagnosis of their condition.
4. Impact of communication disorders
Communication disorders can have an adverse impact on a person’s mental well-being and quality of life, especially when they are undiagnosed and untreated. Depression, anxiety, substance use disorders, and suicidal behaviour have been reported alongside communication disorders in several studies. Botting et al. (2016) reported higher levels of depression and anxiety in people with language impairment at age 16. This was still the case in adulthood (24 years). However, while anxiety remained static between 16 and 24 years, depression decreased after 16 years before returning to a high level at 24 years. Language performance did not predict anxiety or depression in the study’s participants. Khurana et al. (2021) reported an association between hearing impairment and past-year suicide attempt and ideation in 7546 household residents aged 16 and over in England. In a model adjusted for five sociodemographic and clinical covariates, the odds of having suicidal thoughts were almost doubled in those with hearing impairment.
Stransky et al. (2020) compared behavioral health outcomes of adults aged over 17 years with no communication disability (n = 29,873) to adults with voice disorder only (n = 2169), speech and language disorder only (n = 730), and adults with speech, language, and voice disorders (n = 450). Adults with communication disabilities more frequently reported diagnoses such as depression, bipolar disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (7.1–35.9%) compared with adults without communication disabilities (1.8–8.6%). Adults with speech and language disorder only had more substance misuse (15.5%) than adults without communication disability (5.5%). Also, adults with speech and language disorder only and those with speech, language, and voice disorder had more non-specific psychological distress (14.7% and 22.3%, respectively) than adults without communication disabilities (2.3%).
Researchers are increasingly examining quality of life (QoL) in children and adults with communication disorder. QoL is a complex construct that goes beyond well-being to include the functional limitations of a communication disorder on an individual’s life. Eadie et al. (2018) found lower parent-reported QoL at 9 years of age in 70 children with developmental language disorder than in typically developing children. Co-occurring social-emotional problems at 4 and 7 years were predictive of lower QoL at 9 years in these children. QoL has been extensively investigated in people who stutter. High quality of life in adults who stutter is associated with high levels of stuttering disclosure (Boyle et al. 2018) and of self-compassion (i.e., self-kindness, mindfulness, and social connectedness) (Croft and Byrd, 2020). Aphasia has long been associated with reduced QoL in stroke patients. Bullier et al. (2020) reported that poor QoL in 32 stroke patients was associated with increased severity of aphasia (initially and at follow-up) and increased communication activity limitations (at follow-up). Communication activity limitations predicted 24% of the variance in QoL in these patients.
Speech-language pathologists also assess a more specific concept of QoL to examine the impact of communication disorders. So-called communication-related quality of life (CR-QoL) has been examined in Chinese alaryngeal speakers (Law et al. 2009), adults with a tracheostomy tube (Freeman-Sanderson et al. 2018) and spasmodic dysphonia (Baylor et al. 2005), and in adults with oromandibular dystonia (Page et al. 2017). Several measures have been developed to assess CR-QoL, including the Quality of Communication Life Scale (ASHA QCL; Paul et al. 2004). This scale defines quality of communication life as “the extent to which a person’s communication acts—influenced by personal and environmental factors and filtered through a person’s own perspective—allow meaningful participation in life situations”. It captures information about the impact of an adult’s communication disorder on several domains: relationships; communication; interactions; participation in social, leisure, work, and education activities; and overall quality of life. The ASHA QCL is designed specifically for use with adults. While adult measures are also used to assess QoL in children, it should be noted that an instrument that has undergone psychometric development in adult populations may not be suitable for children who may also struggle with the comprehension of certain items (see Gomersall et al. (2015) for a review of QoL measures in children with speech and language difficulties).
5. Communication disorders from birth to old age
As we pass from birth into old age, there are many ways in which communication can break down. While limited space precludes an examination of most of these ways, we can briefly address several communication disorders. We will do so according to five key life stages: the early years; older childhood; adolescence; young adulthood; and old adulthood.
For each life stage, one communication disorder will be highlighted and its impact on speech and language will be examined. The choice of disorders is motivated by two considerations. First, each condition has a high prevalence in the general population and an even higher prevalence in the population of children and adults who require healthcare. This is because children and adults with these conditions often have complex medical needs that necessitate long-term medical supervision. Accordingly, health professionals encounter these types of patients among their clinical caseloads on a routine basis. Second, the conditions that will be discussed also reflect different etiologies. These etiologies include infectious diseases (e.g., COVID-19), neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorder), psychogenic or functional conditions (e.g., puberphonia), and acquired brain injury and disease (e.g., traumatic brain injury and neurodegenerative disease). These diverse medical etiologies are also typical of the clinical caseloads of health professionals, with each presenting unique challenges for communication in health settings.
5.1. The early years
The first years in a child’s life are a period of phenomenal language development. The basics of the child’s sound system are established between 1 year 6 months and 4 years (Yavaş 1998). Between 3 and 5 years of age, several morphological and grammatical developments occur, including over-regularization (e.g., flied versus flew), question and passive formation, and negation. In terms of vocabulary development, children learn the equivalent of 14 words a day for the first six years of their lives, an achievement that is unmatched by even the most able foreign language learners. But the early years can also be a time when language development does not proceed along normal lines. A child may be born with an anatomical defect (e.g., cleft lip and palate) that affects the acquisition of speech sounds. A child’s neurodevelopment may be compromised as part of a genetic syndrome (e.g., fragile X syndrome), leading to intellectual disability and disordered language development. Pre-natal exposure to alcohol, narcotics, prescribed medications, toxins (e.g., lead), and infectious diseases (e.g., rubella) can also place a child at risk of brain damage and disorders of language development.
Children with ASD may not acquire language at all or may make use of delayed and deviant language processes. Table 1 below shows the single-word productions of a boy called BD, aged 8;3 years, who was studied by Wolk and Edwards (1993). BD was diagnosed with autism when he started school at 4 years of age. His language development was significantly delayed. The speech-language pathologist at his school reported that he had almost no expressive language prior to his seventh birthday. BD began to produce two-word utterances at 7;5 years. He had a productive vocabulary of approximately 400–500 words and a mean length of utterance of 2.0–2.2 morphemes at 8;3 years. The intelligibility of BD’s speech was compromised by use of echolalia and jargon at the time of data collection.
